Add quantization techniques and links to byte vector (#4893)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector.md

nav_order: 58
has_children: false
parent: Supported field types
has_math: true
---

# k-NN vector 

> The [k-NN plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/index/) introduces a custom data type, the `knn_vector`, that allows users to ingest their k-NN vectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [k-NN plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/index/) introduces a custom data type, the `knn_vector`, that allows users to ingest their k-NN vectors.
```

## Method definitions

> [Method definitions]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#method-definitions) are used when the underlying [Approximate k-NN]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/) algorithm does not require training. For example, the following `knn_vector` field specifies that *nmslib*'s implementation of *hnsw* should be used for Approximate k-NN search. During indexing, *nmslib* will build the corresponding *hnsw* segment files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Method definitions]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/knn-index#method-definitions) are used when the underlying [approximate k-NN]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/knn/approximate-knn/) algorithm does not require training. For example, the following `knn_vector` field specifies that *nmslib*'s implementation of *hnsw* should be used for approximate k-NN search. During indexing, *nmslib* will build the corresponding *hnsw* segment files.
```

}
```

> However, if you intend to just use Painless scripting or a k-NN score script, you only need to pass the dimension.

Reviewer: I would either replace "just" with "only" or delete "just".

> However, if you intend to just use Painless scripting or a k-NN score script, you only need to pass the dimension.

Author: ```suggestion
However, if you intend to use Painless scripting or a k-NN score script, you only need to pass the dimension.
```

Byte vectors are supported only for the `lucene` engine. They are not supported for the `nmslib` and `faiss` engines.
{: .note}

> In [k-NN benchmarking tests](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool), the use of `byte` rather than `float` vectors resulted in a significant reduction in storage and memory usage while also improving indexing throughput and reducing query latency. Additionally, precision on recall was not greatly affected (note that recall can depend on various factors, such as the [quantization technique](#quantization-techniques) used and data distribution). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [k-NN benchmarking tests](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool), the use of `byte` rather than `float` vectors resulted in a significant reduction in storage and memory usage as well as improved indexing throughput and reduced query latency. Additionally, precision on recall was not greatly affected (note that recall can depend on various factors, such as the [quantization technique](#quantization-techniques) used and data distribution). 
```

> In [k-NN benchmarking tests](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool), the use of `byte` rather than `float` vectors resulted in a significant reduction in storage and memory usage while also improving indexing throughput and reducing query latency. Additionally, precision on recall was not greatly affected (note that recall can depend on various factors, such as the [quantization technique](#quantization-techniques) used and data distribution). 

Reviewer: This reads as though there should be some words before "data distribution". Something like "such as the quantization technique used and the type of data distribution."

Author: Reworded.

  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> ### Quantization techniques

Reviewer 2: Can we also include the pseudo code used for ConsineSimilarity SpaceType and the reason behind using a different technique for different type of dataset(angular) which emphasizes the importance of a quantization technique based on type of data?

Author: @naveentatikonda Done. Please review when you get a chance.

Reviewer 2: @kolchfa-aws Added few comments. Pls take a look

  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Quantization techniques

If your vectors are of type `float`, you need to first convert them to `byte` before ingesting the documents. This conversion is accomplished by _quantizing the dataset_---reducing the precision of its vectors. There are many quantization techniques, such as scalar quantization or product quantization (PQ), which is used in the Faiss engine. The choice of quantization technique depends on the type of data you're using and can affect the accuracy of recall values. The following sections describe the scalar quantization algorithms that were used to quantize the [k-NN benchmarking test](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool) data for the [L2](#scalar-quantization-for-the-l2-space-type) and [cosine similarity](#scalar-quantization-for-the-cosine-similarity-space-type) space types.

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we add a note or statement saying that the below quantization techniques are for reference

#### Scalar quantization for the L2 space type

For Euclidean datasets, we recommend using a scalar quantization technique with L2 space type because Euclidean distance is shift invariant. If you shift both $$x$$ and $$y$$ by the same $$z$$ then the distance remains the same, which means $$\lVert x-y\rVert =\lVert (x-z)-(y-z)\rVert$$.

> The following example pseudocode illustrates scalar quantization for the L2 space type:

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't explain it this way. Can you rephrase it to something like this:

The following example pseudocode illustrates the scalar quantization technique used for the benchmarking tests on Euclidean Datasets (uses L2 space type). Euclidean distance is shift invariant, if you shift both $$x$$ and $$y$$ by the same $$z$$ then the distance remains the same, which means $$\lVert x-y\rVert =\lVert (x-z)-(y-z)\rVert$$.

```python
# Random dataset (Example to create a random dataset)
dataset = np.random.uniform(-300, 300, (100, 10))
# Random query set (Example to create a random queryset)
queryset = np.random.uniform(-350, 350, (100, 10))
# Number of values
B = 256

# INDEXING:
# Get min and max
dataset_min = np.min(dataset)
dataset_max = np.max(dataset)
# Shift coordinates to be non-negative
dataset -= dataset_min
# Normalize into [0, 1]
dataset *= 1. / (dataset_max - dataset_min)
# Bucket into 256 values
dataset = np.floor(dataset * (B - 1)) - int(B / 2)

# QUERYING:
# Clip (if queryset range is out of datset range)
queryset = queryset.clip(dataset_min, dataset_max)
# Shift coordinates to be non-negative
queryset -= dataset_min
# Normalize
queryset *= 1. / (dataset_max - dataset_min)
# Bucket into 256 values
queryset = np.floor(queryset * (B - 1)) - int(B / 2)
```
{% include copy.html %}

#### Scalar quantization for the cosine similarity space type

For angular datasets, we recommend using a scalar quantization technique with cosine similarity because cosine distance is not shift invariant ($$cos(x, y) \neq cos(x-z, y-z)$$). 

> The following example pseudocode illustrates scalar quantization for the cosine similarity space type:

Reviewer 2: Similarly, we need to rephrase this:

The following example pseudocode illustrates the scalar quantization technique used for the benchmarking tests on Angular Datasets (uses cosine similarity space type). Cosine similarity is not shift invariant ($$cos(x, y) \neq cos(x-z, y-z)$$).

```python
# For Positive Numbers

# INDEXING and QUERYING:

# Get Max of train dataset
max = np.max(dataset)
min = 0
B = 127

# Normalize into [0,1]
val = (val - min) / (max - min)
val = (val * B)

# Get int and fraction values
int_part = floor(val)
frac_part = val - int_part

if 0.5 < frac_part:
 bval = int_part + 1
else:
 bval = int_part

return Byte(bval)

> // For Negative Numbers

Reviewer 2: From `For Negative Numbers`, can we break it into separate code block to make it easy to understand.

> // For Negative Numbers

Reviewer 2: nit: 
```suggestion
# For Negative Numbers
```

  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

### Quantization techniques

> If your vectors are of type `float`, you need to first convert them to `byte` before ingesting the documents. This conversion is accomplished by _quantizing the dataset_---reducing the precision of its vectors. There are many quantization techniques, such as scalar quantization or product quantization (PQ), which is used in the Faiss engine. The choice of quantization technique depends on the type of data you're using and can affect the accuracy of recall values. The following sections describe the scalar quantization algorithms that were used to quantize the [k-NN benchmarking test](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool) data for the [L2](#scalar-quantization-for-the-l2-space-type) and [cosine similarity](#scalar-quantization-for-the-cosine-similarity-space-type) space types. The provided pseudocode is for illustration only.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your vectors are of the type `float`, you need to first convert them to the `byte` type before ingesting the documents. This conversion is accomplished by _quantizing the dataset_---reducing the precision of its vectors. There are many quantization techniques, such as scalar quantization or product quantization (PQ), which is used in the Faiss engine. The choice of quantization technique depends on the type of data you're using and can affect the accuracy of recall values. The following sections describe the scalar quantization algorithms that were used to quantize the [k-NN benchmarking test](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool) data for the [L2](#scalar-quantization-for-the-l2-space-type) and [cosine similarity](#scalar-quantization-for-the-cosine-similarity-space-type) space types. The provided pseudocode is for illustration only.
```

> If your vectors are of the type `float`, you need to first convert them to the `byte` type before ingesting the documents. This conversion is accomplished by _quantizing the dataset_---reducing the precision of its vectors. There are many quantization techniques, such as scalar quantization or product quantization (PQ), which is used in the Faiss engine. The choice of quantization technique depends on the type of data you're using and can affect the accuracy of recall values. The following sections describe the scalar quantization algorithms that were used to quantize the [k-NN benchmarking test](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool) data for the [L2](#scalar-quantization-for-the-l2-space-type) and [cosine similarity](#scalar-quantization-for-the-cosine-similarity-space-type) space types. The provided pseudocode is for illustration only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your vectors are of the type `float`, you need to first convert them to the `byte` type before ingesting the documents. This conversion is accomplished by _quantizing the dataset_---reducing the precision of its vectors. There are many quantization techniques, such as scalar quantization or product quantization (PQ), which is used in the Faiss engine. The choice of quantization technique depends on the type of data you're using and can affect the accuracy of recall values. The following sections describe the scalar quantization algorithms that were used to quantize the [k-NN benchmarking test](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/tree/main/benchmarks/perf-tool) data for the [L2](#scalar-quantization-for-the-l2-space-type) and [cosine similarity](#scalar-quantization-for-the-cosine-similarity-space-type) space types. The provided pseudocode is for illustration purposes only.
```

#### Scalar quantization for the L2 space type

> The following example pseudocode illustrates the scalar quantization technique used for the benchmarking tests on Euclidean datasets with the L2 space type. Euclidean distance is shift invariant. If you shift both $$x$$ and $$y$$ by the same $$z$$ then the distance remains the same ($$\lVert x-y\rVert =\lVert (x-z)-(y-z)\rVert$$).

Reviewer 3: A shift invariant? Should we define shift invariant of do we do so earlier?

Author: It's defined in the following sentence.

> The following example pseudocode illustrates the scalar quantization technique used for the benchmarking tests on Euclidean datasets with the L2 space type. Euclidean distance is shift invariant. If you shift both $$x$$ and $$y$$ by the same $$z$$ then the distance remains the same ($$\lVert x-y\rVert =\lVert (x-z)-(y-z)\rVert$$).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example pseudocode illustrates the scalar quantization technique used for the benchmarking tests on Euclidean datasets with the L2 space type. Euclidean distance is shift invariant. If you shift both $$x$$ and $$y$$ by the same $$z$$, then the distance remains the same ($$\lVert x-y\rVert =\lVert (x-z)-(y-z)\rVert$$).
```
